Good evening, folks.
My name is Chuck Pisula,
and I'm an engineer in the
Cocoa Frameworks group.
Today we're going to be
talking about Cocoa Controls,
and my colleague will be talking about
the Cocoa's new accessibility APIs.
Now,
Cocoa has a large variety of controls,
and you'll find that these
controls are easy to use.
They can be customized and
can bend to suit your needs.
And also, you'll find if you need
to write your own control,
well, that's also pretty easy to do.
So today,
my goal is to talk about some of
the basic control concepts and APIs,
and my hope in doing so is
that when you leave here today,
you'll have a basic understanding on how
to use Cocoa Controls and how to do some
customization of these Cocoa Controls.
and I'm also hoping that by
the time you leave here today,
you'll have some insight on
how you write your own control.
Now, to underscore all these points,
as we go along,
I'll be presenting a demo which shows
how you can write your own control,
extend it,
and use it in different various
ways in your own application.
So many controls in the
Cocoa frameworks are subclasses of
these things called NSControl and NSL.
And we're going to focus today on
those specific set of controls.
Now,
there are also many other UI elements in
the Cocoa frameworks which are subclasses
of things other than NSControl and NSL.
For those today, I'm just going to refer
you to the documentation,
and we'll move on today
focusing on NSControl and NSL.
So I mentioned two classes.
This doesn't mean, however,
that we're going to be talking about
two completely separate things today.
In fact, NS Controls and NS Cells
work very closely together,
and in general this means that
they have very similar APIs.
Typically, an NS Control does its work,
in fact, by asking its own cell or one of
its cells to do the work for it.
Now, a control,
being a subclass of NSView,
is the one that knows its
location in the view hierarchy,
and that's sort of its job,
is to manage either its only cell or
one of its cells and tell it what to do,
and not only what to do,
but where it should do it.
And we're going to sort of discover how
this happens throughout our discussion.
Now, it turns out that this division of
labor between control managing its
cells and cells doing work for its
control provides us a lot of flexibility.
In fact,
it makes it pretty easy for us to
write a control such as a table view,
which can group multiple,
potentially even
different kinds of cells.
And it can do this in a manner that
doesn't require lots of memory because a
cell doesn't have to carry along its own
graphics context like an NSView does.
So let's talk a little bit
more about NSControl now.
As I've said,
NSControl is a subclass of NSView,
so it's the one between
NSControl and NSCell that has
a place in the view hierarchy.
And it has sort of two main functions.
One is to manage its cell or
multiple cells and manage when
the cell does the work for it.
So a control will ask its cells
to do things like drawing for it,
store values for it, and so on.
And the other bit of work that
it typically does involves
things not related to cells,
sort of aggregate-level functionality.
For instance,
a table is the one that's in charge
of maintaining a row selection.
Cells do not do the row selection.
Now, I've been talking about this point
that cells do the work for controls,
and here is an example of how a
cell can do the work for control,
even though it doesn't have a
place in the view hierarchy.
For instance,
when a cell is told to draw,
it's told where to draw and in
what view it's doing its drawing.
Now, besides drawing,
cells have lots of other
things that they do.
They are able to set and store
values and typically provide
functionality that allows you to
customize the look of a control.
Now, I've been driving home this
point that NS Control does its
work by telling its NS cell,
or one of its cells,
to do the work for it.
And what this means then is that if
you're writing your own control and cell,
you're not writing twice as much code.
Because typically, NS Control is simply,
its methods are simply
covers for NS cell methods.
So when you ask a button
for its string value,
it just implements it by asking its
button cell for its string value.
And you'll find that you don't actually
really even end up writing lots of this
boilerplate code that forwards methods,
because NS Control itself provides most
of this base functionality for you,
so that you don't have to do it yourself.
Now, so, from here on out,
since controls and cells are so
similar and have very similar APIs,
I'm mostly going to be using the
term "control" when I'm referring
to NSControls and NSCells.
And where I want to be specific,
I'll specifically say,
"This pertains to NSControls
or this pertains to NSCells."
So just to simplify the discussion,
I'll use "controls" to mean
both for most of the time.
From here,
we're going to move on to talking a
little bit about some of the standard
functionality provided by controls,
including setting and getting values,
dealing with target actions, delegation,
control sizes, and various other things
that cells provide for you.
Excuse me, controls.
So to start off, controls have this
concept of setting values,
and it's not really a very
hard concept to understand.
But the thing that's interesting
to know is that typically a control
implements lots of different
The first thing I want to talk
about is the value of a slider.
It seems natural that a
slider would provide you a set
floating point value method,
and that would reflect in the
slider the value that you just set.
However, a slider also allows you to set
its value using a string value.
As long as it can convert that into
something it knows how to display,
it will go ahead and convert the
string into a floating point value.
So it's good to know that
whenever you're using controls,
you can typically set any kind of
value on them as long as they can
convert it into what they need to do.
And likewise, they can return you values
in multiple formats.
So you'll also want to keep this in mind
when you're writing your own control,
that if it makes sense,
you should support as many
different kinds of setters
and getters that you can.
The next thing I'm going to
talk about is control size.
When you're dealing with views,
normally you can have a view
resized to just about any size.
But when you're dealing
with standard UI elements,
typically you want to have them be one
of the standard sizes in the system.
And this control size property that
controls have allow you to pick either
a small or a regular variant of the
standard controls in the frameworks.
So if you want to have, for example,
a small button,
you would set its control size
to be in a small control size.
and typically the cell is the one that
implements this control size property.
But when you have a control
that doesn't have a cell,
it makes sense for the NSControl
to be the one that implements this.
So for instance,
NSTabView doesn't deal in cells,
so it's the one that implements
this control size setter.
Okay, so I figure everybody's already
attended the intro sections,
or they're already very
familiar with target action,
so we're not going to talk about
the concept of target action.
I'm just going to mention
that controls are,
you know,
typically tend to be things that
users interact with and they click on,
and users expect things to
happen when they click on them.
And this is where target
action comes into play.
Controls have a target that they send
an action method to when some sort
of user interaction has happened.
When you click a button,
the action method gets sent.
When a slider value changes,
And for some controls,
they will actually do this continuously,
or they could wait until you're
done manipulating the value.
So a slider could
continuously send this action,
or it could wait until you've
reached your final value
that you decided to pick.
An interesting thing to note when
you're programming is that the sender
argument in these target action
methods will always be the control.
If for some reason you
need to access the cell,
then, well, it's either the only cell
that the control has,
or if it has multiple cells,
it'll be the selected cell.
And sometimes controls
provide their own actions,
so I might want to be able to receive
a distinct action method when someone
double-clicks in a table view row.
Many people writing their own
applications often want to customize
or be involved in the text editing
that's going on in a control,
and controls allow you this ability.
They give you a couple different options.
So if you need to customize text editing,
one way is to implement some
delegate methods that let you know,
for instance,
that a text value just changed,
or you could have the control ask you,
"Should text begin
editing?" and so forth.
I'm going to touch on a
little bit of this API,
the specific API for this,
a little bit later,
so I'll just leave it at that for now.
If you need to customize
how editing actually works,
there's something called a
field editor that you can modify
attributes for or even replace.
It turns out that
Even if you have multiple
text fields in a window,
there's only one view
that does the editing.
When you start editing in a text field,
a text view is swapped in its place,
and that's where the
editing actually happens.
Typically, you don't have to worry about
this level of indirection,
but if you want to customize editing,
it's something you might
need to know about.
Now, you're probably maybe thinking,
"Why would I need to customize this
editor?" One good example is the secure
text field in the Cocoa frameworks.
It goes ahead and replaces the standard
field editor with its own so that it
knows that it shouldn't copy and paste.
And finally,
another way to customize text
editing is to simply attach
formatters to a text field.
For instance,
you could force the values in
a text field to be date values.
Okay, so I just mentioned these text
editing notifications and delegation,
and now we're going to see
what the API looks like.
In general,
controls will provide their own
delegate messages so that you
can customize their behavior.
So each specific control will
have their own specific set of
these delegation and notification.
But it turns out that any control that
allows text editing has a standard set
of delegate messages and notifications.
And basically what it does is send
you... Let me back up a second.
The control...
The table view that's being edited wants
to be the delegate of this field editor.
It's actually the one that's receiving
text-editing delegate messages,
because a table view really needs to
know that text started editing and it
needs to know when it ends editing.
But being a good citizen,
any control that is doing this decides
that it will forward these delegate
messages to you so that you can be part
of the decisions that are going on.
And you can also know that, for instance,
text just changed in this
table view that's being edited.
So if you need to know, for instance,
that text has changed,
you would register for the
NS Control text to change
notification on your table.
Okay, so controlled, excuse me,
NS cells are the ones that do lots
of the work for their controls.
And in fact,
we've already touched on drawing,
that cells,
even though they're not a view,
they do the drawing for their NS control.
They also can do things
like handle mouse events.
So you see the method up here,
trackMouse, indirect of view,
until mouseUp.
This is the method that gets sent to
a cell when it starts mouse tracking.
And of course, again,
you'll see this as a recurring
theme that when we tell it to
do something for a view that
involves event handling or drawing,
it's told what the cell frame
is and in what view it's in.
It turns out that if you want to do
mouse tracking at a finer granularity,
there's a set of three methods that
you could override that make it a
little easier than doing this one.
And I'll just refer you to
the documentation for that.
Now, it sounds like basically cell is
always told what it's supposed to do.
It turns out it actually is allowed
to tell its control some things too.
For instance, if a cell knows that it
needs to be at least so big,
you can override the cell
size for bounds method and try
and tell your control that,
"Hey, I need to be at least this big."
Okay,
so you can draw in a cell using a cell.
You can track the mouse using a cell.
You can actually even provide
context menus as a cell.
Views provide the functionality
of having context menus.
There's methods like set menu,
return the menu, provide a default menu,
but cells are also allowed
to provide their own menu.
And again, you see this mantra again,
"Menu for event,
in-rect of view." There's the
in-rect of view parameter,
so that the cell can use that
information to determine,
you know,
say if I'm in the right half of the cell,
then I provide this one menu.
If I'm in the left half,
I'll give this other one.
Okay,
so that's a little bit about some of
the basic concepts and APIs that you'll
find when you're dealing with controls,
NS Controls and NS Cells.
Now, there are lots of simple controls
in the Cocoa framework you can just
use right off the pallet in IB.
And because they're
really so simple to use,
I just decided I would throw
up a picture of them and not
really talk too much about them.
I think it's something everyone
can go and explore on their own.
But of the ones I have up here,
there's some interesting
comments to be made.
The checkbox, the radio button,
and all the variations of
button you see on the left side,
actually all happen to be just
different styles of an NSButton.
The secure text field,
you see that actually that
just has the dots in it,
is a subclass of NSTextFieldCell,
and these are the two
main forms of text entry.
There are controls that allow
you to just display an image.
Controls such as the color wall
that allow you to select a color
and bring up the color panel.
And there are controls that combine
Characteristics of things like
the text field and pop-up buttons
and give you something like
the combo box on the far right.
The combo box is part text field,
part pop-up.
So,
if you want to find out more about those,
I would just go on IB,
drag them off the palette,
and just play around with the
different attributes that you
can set and use with them.
For now,
I'd like to go to the demo machine.
Okay, for our first demo,
we're going to start by
creating our own control,
and you'll see some of these methods
that we talked about in action,
as well as some of the controls
that we just saw on the screen.
So let's start out by going, well,
let's start out by me explaining
what we're going to do.
We're going to start out and
try and create a project that
has our own clock control on it.
So we're going to create a subclass
of NSControl that's a clock control.
We're going to create a subclass
of NSCell that's a clock cell.
And we're going to use it just in
a straightforward way in this demo,
but then we're going to use it throughout
in our other demos and extend it.
So to start,
let's show you the declaration
of this clock cell.
Clock Cell actually is a
subclass of NS Action Cell.
That's something I'll just refer
you to the documentation for.
NS Action Cell is the one that
has the action and a target.
It's aptly named Action Cell.
And we've declared a couple methods.
We want to be able to set times.
We want to be able to connect
it to things in IB that tell it,
"Hey, take your hour value
from me," and so forth.
And again, because controls and cells
do lots of the same things,
you see the clock control has pretty much
the same interface as the clock cell.
So let's go take a look at the code.
And let me point out first,
there's a lot of code there,
but a lot of it's just legalese.
The first thing I want to point out
is that there's really not much to the
NS Control subclass that we've made.
There's a couple things we do for setup.
and then a couple of the setter methods
and the take value from type methods.
And all we really do is
forward it off to our cell.
We don't really do anything ourselves.
And you might be thinking, "Well,
how does this cell ever end up drawing?
We don't tell it to draw anywhere." Well,
it turns out that NS Control provides
lots of standard default behavior
for it that just does what we want.
So we're going to be
able to draw our clock,
be able to track the mouse,
pop up a context menu,
all with what we currently have here,
which is basically just default behavior.
So let's go look at what we've
done for cell a little bit.
And before I go on,
let me point out that I'm not
really going to hover or hang around
with any of the code too much.
I'm going to skim over it pretty quickly.
But we've made the code available.
It wasn't available
as of 3 o'clock today,
but it should be there soon.
What you should do is log into the
ADC site and use your seed key to check
out what's new in the downloadable area.
So we've got some initial setup.
We have some initialization routines.
I'm going to skim over these.
They're pretty standard,
in it with coders, archiving-type things.
We need the ability to be able
to copy for various things.
They're just boilerplate things
that we sort of fill out always.
And we're going to have a clock
that's changing its value,
so we're actually going to want to
be able to send an action message
to someone when our value changes.
So here's a little utility routine
that will send the action for us.
Moving on, we've got a bunch of utility
routines that set the time in
various manners by incrementing,
by moving to a specific time,
by checking the angle from north.
We've got some other setters.
And I decided that it made sense to allow
someone to set it using a string value.
As long as it's a format I understand,
I'll convert the string value to a time.
We've implemented our
"takeMinuteValueFrom,"
"takeHourValueFrom," "takeStyleMethods."
Then we have a routine here which
draws the hands of the clock.
This is a lot of math.
I'm just going to skip over it.
And finally, we have our Draw With Frame,
which does the work of looking up an
image that we draw in our background
and finally drawing the image
and then drawing the clock hands.
We've got some utility routine here,
I'll skip over.
And then we have...
If we scroll down to it,
the mouse tracking routine,
which is going to track the mouse.
So when I click on the clock,
I want it to update its time
as I move the mouse around.
And the stuff I skipped over is just
sort of hit detection and event tracking.
That's stuff you can look at in
the demo code if you download it.
And then I've overridden menu for
event to return a context menu,
which will show me the time and
allow me to change the time.
and that's it.
So now let's go look at what
we have in Interface Builder.
I've got a lot of material to cover,
so I've already... Excuse me.
I've gone ahead and already
dragged out all of the things that
I want to use in the interface.
I'm just going to connect them up
so I can show you what's happening.
I want this slider value,
when it's moved to...
[Transcript missing]
We're going to let our application
controller have an outlet so that
we'll call it a time readout.
Whenever the clock time changes,
we will actually have the clock send
the action method to the app controller,
and then it's going
to update the readout.
So we connect the clock's
action to our app controller,
and it'll invoke the
clock time changed method.
So let's save.
We'll go back to Project Builder
2nd and show you the action method.
"It's really pretty simple.
All it does is ask the
clock for its string value,
which the clock converts
to a standard format,
and we display it.
So let's build and run."
Okay,
so you saw again that the control code
was really pretty straightforward.
We didn't tell it where
it was supposed to draw,
when it was supposed to draw,
but it's drawing because
it inherited that behavior.
Same thing for tracking.
Thank you for joining us.
I'm going to go back to some more
discussion and then we'll come back
to this demo a little bit later and
extend it and use it in different ways.
So if we could have the slides again,
please.
Okay, we're going to talk about
some more controls now.
Specifically,
the stuff we've been talking about so far
have been sort of single-celled beasts,
where, for instance,
a button has one cell, an NSButton cell.
Now we're going to be
talking about controls that
typically have multiple cells.
We're going to talk about NSTabView,
we're going to talk about TableView,
OutlineView, and Browser.
And as tab view actually is a class
that doesn't really use any cells.
And as tab view is a control
because it has a target in action.
So when you change the
currently selected tab,
it'll send an action
method to its target.
But the things that it displays happen
to be the views of its tab view items.
And the things that it displays
in the tab at the top happen to be
the label of the tab view items.
NSTabView in Jaguar now
supports directional tabs,
so you can have tabs in the left, right,
bottom, and top.
And also, it supports tabless tabs,
if you happen to need
something like that.
It can be useful as a
simple view swapper.
And because NSTabView doesn't
have any cells,
it's the one that implements
this control size property,
so you can have small
and regular controls,
but you would tell the tab that
you want the small control size.
Next, I'm going to talk about matrix.
And the thing I want to point
out about matrix is you usually
don't make these programmatically.
These are usually things
that you get in IB.
If you've played around
in IB and happened to,
I believe it's option drag, say a button,
you'll notice that all of a sudden
you start getting more buttons,
all grouped in a regular grid.
Well, this option dragging has created a
matrix of NSButton cells for you.
It started with a button, with one cell,
and then converted it into
a matrix of button cells.
Now, if you need to create a
matrix programmatically,
it can surely be done, and it's useful,
for instance, when you want to have a
gridded group of cells.
And there's lots of API that allows you
to control the arrangement of cells and
control the appearance and so forth.
And I'm not going to go into
those because the real reason
I wanted to talk about matrix is
because it's used by NSBrowser.
So NSBrowser is used-- you're all,
I'm sure,
familiar with it from the open panel.
It displays hierarchical data.
and each column in the browser
happens to be in NSMatrix that's
wrapped in an NSScrollView.
These matrices are filled
with a bunch of cells,
and all the cells happen
to be NSBrowserCell or
NSBrowserCell subclasses.
And the data that's going to go
into these cells is provided by you.
When you're writing your program,
you're going to supply a
delegate for the browser,
and it's this delegate that will
load data into these cells that
the browser then displays for you.
and again,
there's lots of API that I would
recommend just going to the documentation
for to figure out how it allows you
to control NS Browser in various ways.
Okay, so you're the one that's in control
of loading the data into the browser.
So how do you do it?
Well,
there's two mechanisms for doing it.
One is referred to in the
documentation as active.
The other one is referred to as passive.
I sometimes prefer to think
of this as immediate or lazy.
Not because I'm a lazy person,
but just immediate or lazy.
In the immediate manner,
when the browser needs to load
a new column with some data,
it's going to send a message
to your delegate and say,
"Hey, go ahead and load a list of this
many browser cells into this matrix
that I sent you." And it turns out
that this matrix happens to be at
a particular place in the browser.
So you're given the matrix and you fill
it with your own custom NSBrowser cells.
When you're loading
data in a lazy fashion,
and this makes sense, for instance,
if you're an open panel,
which doesn't want to necessarily
touch everything in a directory that
you just saw on a network file system.
So what you would do in that situation is
Implement methods that tell the browser,
"Okay,
for this new column that you just saw,
this is how many rows I want to
have in it." And then you don't
actually load the data right away.
You just tell it these are how
many rows that the column has.
Now, each time the browser has to
display one of those cells,
it will realize that cell's not loaded,
and it will send you the "browser
will display cell at row" method.
And at that point,
what you do is load the data.
So the first time the cell
has to be displayed is the
time when you load the data.
Now, because browser cells
can be loaded lazily,
browser cells have to be able to tell
you if they've been loaded or not.
And the only other real property
that's interesting in NSBrowser cells
themselves is the fact that they can
be a leaf node or a non-leaf node.
Typically, you're going to just make your
own subclasses of NSBrowserCell,
and that's what you're going to load
into the matrices of your browser.
Okay, so let's move on to NS Table View,
which is not a hierarchical data.
It's basically a simple list that
is divided into many different parts.
A table happens to live
inside of a scroll view,
which has a header view,
which is divided into multiple columns.
So there's many parts
to an NS table view.
The important parts,
which we're gonna touch on,
are the table itself
and the table column.
Okay, so just like NS Browser,
NS TableView depends
heavily on a data source.
In fact, it depends even more heavily on
someone to supply it with data.
Whereas the browser has an immediate mode
where it can load all the data up front,
TableView has no such option.
All of its data always
comes from the data source.
And one of the main reasons for this is,
for instance, in, say you're writing a
database application,
and you had thousands of elements
that you wanted to have on a table,
you would never want to load
all those elements into a table.
You want to load it in a lazy manner.
And another good reason for this is
that this clearly separates your model
from your view in your application,
and allows you much more flexibility.
So as a data source,
you implement two methods.
The first one, much like the browser,
tells it how many rows it has.
And the second one is a method
which provides data that's going
to be given to a cell so the cell
knows what it should display.
So the second method
is the interesting one,
which I'm going to talk
about a little bit later.
You notice it's returning
this thing called,
given a table view, it returns the object
value for a particular
intersection of column and row.
And we'll talk about a little bit
later what this object value is.
Now, since you're the one that's
controlling all the data,
there are a couple methods that you
need to know about so that you can tell
the table it needs to refresh itself.
You can tell it to reload or note
that the number of rows in your cell,
the table has changed.
So let's talk about this object value.
Remember,
there are a bunch of different set
methods that NSLs had implemented:
setString, setFloat.
Well, one that they all happen to
implement also is setObjectValue.
So the object value that's returned
from this data source method is handed
to a cell in the setObjectValue,
and the cell looks at it and says, "Oh,
the object value I was handed
was this type of thing.
I'll convert it into what I need to,
so I now know how to
display." And a cell also,
of course,
then needs to be able to report
what its object value is.
So it has a setObjectValue and
a getObjectValue type method.
An example usage of this would be,
say you had a text field in your table.
Well, your data source could return the
string created by string with format,
Homer, and it would set the object
value of that cell to Homer,
which is then going to be displayed
at that column and row intersection.
Okay, now say you also want to be able
to edit your cells in your table.
There's another method you would
implement in your data source,
which is similar to the
getStyle object value,
except for this one
is a set object value.
So when an object value changes,
you'll be sent the tableView set object
value for table column row message.
The object value you're set is
the new object value of the cell,
and it's up to you to store
this in your data store,
so that the next time it asks
you for the object value,
you return that new object value.
Okay.
And finally,
there's all sorts of other data
source and delegate methods that
you can implement for your table
view that allow you to do things
like drag and drop and so forth.
And I'll just refer you
to the documentation to
find out more about those.
TableView also provides lots of
delegation and notifications that
allow you to customize its behavior,
such as you can know
when a row was selected,
You can know when the table
header column has been dragged
from one position to another.
There's lots of delegation notifications.
Table view is highly customizable.
And that's my whole point
in listing these up here.
I'll just again refer you to the
documentation to find out those.
Just know that table view
is highly customizable.
NSOutlineView happens to be
a subclass of NSTableView,
and it is a hierarchical version
that can display hierarchies of data.
And its main difference comes
from the fact that it is able
to display hierarchies of data.
So it makes sense that
TableView deals in rows,
but it doesn't necessarily make sense
that an OutlineView deals in rows,
right?
Because,
say you expand a particular row and
display the children in that row,
now all of a sudden all the
rows have shifted around.
So OutlineView doesn't
like to deal in rows.
Instead,
it deals in these things we call "items."
and you'll see this in all
of the API for Outline View.
So again, Outline View requires a data
source to supply it with data,
and the difference here relates to
the fact that it displays a hierarchy
of data and it deals in items.
and so you need to be able
to tell it for a particular
item how many children it has.
If a particular item is expandable,
you need to be able to tell it
You need to be able to tell it
what the particular object value
of a child is and so forth.
And one important note is that
the nil item refers to the
root item of your outline view.
So now I'm going to go
back to the demo machine,
please.
And we're going to see a little bit
how you can use the custom control
that we just made in a table view.
So I've gone ahead and,
ahead of time again,
created a window with a table in it.
It has a remove button and an add button.
We're going to sort of
make a mini-planner.
And the columns of this table
I guess I forgot to
mention one of my slides.
Columns are identified by
something called an identifier,
so that's something that we
have to set in the attributes.
We'll call this column "time."
and we'll call this column "info."
So one will display the clock,
the other one will have info.
Now we need to wire some things up.
We've created some new methods
in our application controller
to add an appointment,
remove,
and our controller needs
to know about the table.
And finally, the data source.
The table has to know who
it's getting its data from,
so we'll set that up.
So now we should have all our
pieces set up in Interface Builder.
Look at the code that we've added.
Remember, our application controller is
the data source for the table.
So we must have added
some new methods to it.
Well, first of all,
it looks like in our Wake From Nib,
we've gone ahead and changed
the data cell of the time
column to be a clock cell.
And we've done some nifty stuff with
the data cell in the info column.
And we've started out with
an initial appointment.
Okay, and then we've implemented our
methods to add appointments,
they update a datastore that we have,
remove an appointment that
will also update our datastore.
And finally, the interesting thing,
which is the
[Transcript missing]
We will access the record at the
index in our appointment datastore,
and then we will simply
return the time of that.
So the time will be handed off to the
clock cell that's about to display,
and then the clock cell will know, "Oh,
this is my time.
This is the time that I display."
And since we want to allow editing,
we need to override the set
object value data source method.
So we receive a new object value,
and that object value is passed to,
is used to set the time,
if we're in the time column,
or set the information string if
we're in the information column.
I did mention that we're
now using object values,
so we must have to go back to
our clock cell and implement
the set object value method.
and I don't remember where it is,
so we'll do a quick scan.
And there's our new set
object value method.
What we'll do is look at the object value
and see if it's an NS Calendar date.
Well,
we know how to handle that natively,
so we'll just set the time
using that object that we got.
If it happens to be a string, well,
we already know how to
convert from strings to time,
so we'll use that.
Otherwise,
we'll just raise an exception because
we don't know how to handle it.
So we go ahead, build and run.
And our initial point
where we gave it is there.
If we edit one of the table
columns and say something like,
"Release the hounds,"
[Transcript missing]
Okay,
and that's all I wanted to show for that.
We can add all sorts
of records if we want.
Okay, can we back the slides, please?
So now I'd like to move on to
accessibility considerations,
including keyboard accessibility,
keyboard navigation,
and Cocoa's new accessibility APIs.
So the first thing in dealing with
keyboard accessibility and keyboard
navigation is having a keyboard loop.
So first we need to set up a keyboard
loop in our application's windows.
We need to be able to display focus if
we're running our own custom control.
We also need to be able to
tell the system we want focus,
and once we have focus,
we should do something with it.
So we need to handle keyboard events.
To tell the system you want focus,
override the AcceptFirstResponder
method and return "Yes" if you
want to be able to have focus.
FirstResponder roughly equates
to being the focused control.
And now that we've told the
system that we want focus,
we need to tell it when and in
what situation we want focus.
If we want to act more like a text
field and allow clicks to give us focus,
then you should return "Yes"
from "NeedsPanel" to become key.
If, however,
you only want to receive focus
when someone tabs to you when
any control is accessible,
then you should return "No" from this.
So in general,
things like buttons don't get
focus when you click on them.
They shouldn't shift focus away from
a text field if you click on a button.
Okay,
so we told the system we want focus.
Now we have to know that we have focus.
To know you have focus,
override the become
first responder method.
To know that you no longer have focus,
override the resign
first responder method.
And to check if you have focus,
we said that roughly being first
responder means you have focus.
Check with the window to
see who's first responder.
If it's you, you have focus.
Now when you draw focus,
you shouldn't draw focus only
if you're the first responder.
You should make sure that
you're also in the key window.
Because if you're not in the key
window and you're drawing focus,
we could have a situation where
two windows are showing focus.
Okay,
now that we know we've gotten focused,
we need to be able to tell
the system to redraw ourselves
so that once we get focused,
we update our drawing.
So if you override become
and resign first responder,
you would do a set needs display
so that you redraw yourself.
And similarly, you would want to find out
when the window you're in
has changed its key state.
And when the window changes key state,
you again need to redisplay yourself
to either show or stop showing focus.
and finally, if you're drawing focus
and you need to redisplay,
you should use the new Set Keyboard
Focus Ring Needs Display Interact
because keyboard focus rings can happen
to fall outside of your view's bounds,
and this special method will
help take care of that situation.
Okay, now that we have focus,
we need to do something with it.
One way is to override key down
and handle the raw key events.
Another way is to override one
of a series of standard methods
that the Cocoa text input system
will automatically convert
Keystrokes To and
Send To the focused control.
For instance, when a right arrow is
pressed on the keyboard,
the text input system will convert that
into a move right method and try and
send it to the control that has focus.
If it implements it,
well then it can do what
it wants to and move right.
And if it doesn't,
well then you'll eventually get a
key down and you can handle it there.
Okay, so now let's talk a little bit
about how you set up keyboard
loops in your application window.
Typically what you do is set the
initial first responder of your window,
and then for each control in your window,
you would set the next key view
outlet until you have the keyboard
loop you want in your window.
Now if you find that this is tedious,
what you could do is just not set the
initial first responder or do anything
at all and let Cocoa compute it for you.
And it turns out,
if you're not adding and
removing views all the time,
this is usually just what you want,
so see if that works for you first.
Now if you are adding and
removing views all the time,
you'll need to make sure that
you maintain the keyboard loop,
or you'll get in strange situations
where a view in the keyboard loop is not
actually still in the view hierarchy.
Okay, and finally,
I'd like to show a demo.
Back to the demo machine, please.
For this demo,
we will add a focus ring to our clock.
I haven't shown anything yet.
Okay, so we've added some code to our
controller to do the focus ring stuff.
We've told it, yes,
we do indeed want to be first responder,
and we'd prefer to act
more like a button.
We want people to have to tab
to us to be able to get focus.
We've overridden the view to
move to Windows so that we can
figure out when the window we're
in has changed its key state.
and we've overridden "become" and
"resign first responder" to know that
we have gained first responder and
we re-display in those situations.
[Transcript missing]
We've added it to the cell.
So when the cell receives a move right,
it will increment the time.
When it receives a move left,
it will decrement,
and various things for other
types of standard messages.
So let's run, and I'll just demonstrate
what it's capable of.
So I tab and I notice I can't get there,
so I forgot to do one thing.
I have to bring up System Preferences
and tell it that I want to be
able to access any control.
Because I returned "no" from that
"needs panel to become key" method,
that means I can only get
focus there until I tab to it.
So I've tabbed to it now.
I can use the keyboard
to change the time.
[Transcript missing]
and all I'm doing is using the keyboard.
Okay.
Can we go back to the slides, please?
Okay, now I would like to invite up on
stage the guy that will be keeping
you from getting to the beer bash.
And I hope I've left him with
enough time so that he can get done
and we have time for questions.
Mike Engber.
My name is Mike Engber,
and for the next 20 minutes or so,
or until you get too anxious
to get to the beer bash,
I'm going to talk to you about the
new accessibility APIs and what they
mean to you as Cocoa developers.
So in Jaguar, we've introduced some
new accessibility APIs.
And basically what these APIs let
assistive apps do is look at the
user interface of other applications.
For instance, a screen reader could use
these APIs to discover the
windows in another application,
and then find in the window a button,
discover what text the button displays,
present that to the user,
and then finally press that button.
[Transcript missing]
In this session,
we're going to talk about
the other side of those APIs,
what the target application has to do
in order to present its user interface.
And specifically,
we're going to talk about what
Cocoa applications have to do.
To help motivate you to take the
trouble to make your apps accessible,
Kevin Aiitken from the Speech Group is
going to show what they can do
with an app that is accessible.
We need to go to demo machine number one.
Oh right, we're there.
Okay.
So the speech group's been working on
a number of new features for Jaguar.
Two of them are using the new
accessibility API and I want to go
through those real quick and I also
want to touch on as a developer who's
creating a custom control in Cocoa,
I want you to think about these
new built-in speech features and
make sure that your custom control
works well with those and I'll
just touch on those real quick.
So let me go to the
speech preference panel.
And first what I'll do is I will turn on
new feature in our text to speech system.
Speaker 2: Speak text under the mouse.
That speaks to text under the
mouse as I move around the screen.
Speaker 2: Speech recognition.
I'm using accessibility API to ask it
first what is underneath the mouse.
It gives me an object and then
from that object I get its title.
Well, that works really well for
all these standard controls.
But because I know that which
ones I want to get the title from,
which ones I want to get the value.
But for custom control I'm not
quite sure what I should get.
Speaker 2: Cloud control.
Speaker 3: And so in here we have
some standard controls.
Should be speaking.
"And..." "There we go." "Page..." "But
for a custom control like the clock,
we're not sure what we
should be asking for.
Should we be asking for the title?
Should we be asking for the value?
So what we're suggesting is that you add
an additional attribute that Mike will
talk about here in a little bit,
about attributes.
But we would like you to add an
attribute called 'Apple Synthesis'
and that way we can look for that
specific attribute and then speak it.
So in this case, we've implemented that
attribute." "At the tone,
the time will be 3:12 PM.
Beep." "So we've done something a bit."
humorist there,
but that points out that you'll be
able to fine tune exactly what you
want our built in text to speech system
to say when the user mouses over that.
So, likewise,
really quickly show speech recognition.
And let me turn off the screen reader.
So speech recognition has the same issue.
What we do is we use the accessibility
API to go through the front window
and create a command for each
one of the items in there as
well as items in the menu bar.
But again, we have the same problem
for a custom control.
So you'll see a bit
later that this clock,
well, actually saw in Chuck's demo that
you can increment and decrement.
So something we'll be documenting is
how you can provide the spoken command
and map that to the actions that you
support for the speech recognition.
So that's a little bit of a demo.
So, I'm going to go ahead and
show you how to do that.
So, I'm going to go ahead and show
you how to do that custom control.
So, with that,
I'll turn it back over to Mike.
Okay.
Can we get the slides back?
Okay,
so first I'll give you some good news.
All the standard user interface
elements that you use in
Cocoa are already accessible.
So if you use those,
there's not much you need to do.
[Transcript missing]
Before we can get into the
details of the protocol,
there's a couple fundamental
concepts I want to explain to
you about the accessibility APIs.
One of the big issues that has
to be solved is how does a target
app represent its user interface
to the assistive application?
And this diagram shows an assistive
application trying to query what's
in a Cocoa app and a Carbon app.
And the question marks indicate that
it's not really clear how they should
communicate their user interfaces back.
Each of these applications has a natural
representation of its user interface
in terms of its own native types.
The Cocoa app has
NSWindows and NSControls,
and the Carbon app has
WindowRefs and ControlRefs.
There are some problems trying to
use these natural representations.
For one thing, it means the assistive app
gets to do twice as much work.
It has to understand all the
native widgetry of Cocoa and
the native widgetry of Carbon.
Another problem is there is a lot of
excess of detail that would be exposed.
If you consider a simple example
of just a button in a window,
in a Cocoa app that's really a
button cell inside a button control,
inside the content view of the window,
inside another view,
and finally you get to the window.
The assistive app really only
wants to know there's a window
and there's a button in it,
and it doesn't care about the rest.
So this slide is basically the same
diagram with some boxes showing the
new code that was added in Jaguar.
The box in front of the assistive
app are the accessibility APIs.
The box in front of the Cocoa app
is the accessibility protocol.
And you'll notice that the question
mark has been replaced with the
word "UI element." A UI element is
short for user interface element,
and that's basically our solution
to the representation problem.
Everything is a user interface element.
A button is a user interface element.
A menu is a user interface element.
A window is a user interface element.
And there's even a special user
interface element to represent
the top-level application.
So basically,
applications are represented as a
hierarchy of user interface elements.
User interface elements
have attributes and actions.
Attributes are how you get information
about a user interface element.
For instance, its title, or its value,
or its children,
which would be the basis for
traversing the whole hierarchy.
They also could support actions.
A button user interface
element would support press.
A slider might support
increment and decrement.
So the magic that makes this work
is the accessibility protocol.
And it's a protocol on NSObject
because there's a wide variety of
different objects in Cocoa that
can act as user interface elements.
For instance, windows, controls, views,
and cells.
And really,
the only common ancestor in their
inheritance hierarchy is NSObject.
So the first part of the
protocol deals with methods.
And so there's a method for returning a
list of all the attributes you support.
There's a method for returning the
value of a particular attribute.
There's a method for testing if a
particular attribute can be set.
And finally,
there's a method for setting its value.
You're probably most likely
to override the method for
returning an attribute's value.
If you consider override,
you're interested in returning a custom
value for the title of some UI element,
you would override the accessibility
attribute value method.
And the first thing you would do is
test if the name of the attribute
that's being asked about is the title.
If it is, you can return whatever
you want for the title.
If it's not, you call super so that other
attributes will be handled for you
from the inheritance hierarchy.
One thing I'd like to point
out is that you should avoid
inventing new kinds of attributes.
Assistive apps aren't going
to be expecting them and they
may completely ignore them.
So when I accessorize the clock,
instead of creating a time attribute,
I just use the value attribute
and return the time as a string.
The second suite of methods in
the protocol deal with actions,
and there's a method to return the
names of all the actions you support.
and the rest of the team will
be joined in the next session.
You're less likely to
override the action methods.
If you create a kind of button,
the odds are that you want it
to support the press action,
which you're going to inherit for free,
and what you'd like it to do
when it's pressed is invoke
the action on its target.
You should think of actions
as very simple things,
basically what you could accomplish
with a single click of the mouse,
pressing a button, picking a menu item,
things like that.
and some other things you should keep
in mind is that attributes aren't
the only way that an assistive app
can interact with your application.
So you might say,
"How am I going to implement an action
that selects text because actions
don't get any parameters?" Well,
the way that's done is
there's an attribute,
the selected text range,
and if the assistive app wants to change
the range of text that's selected,
they just set the value of the attribute.
So now that we know some of the
basic concepts of the accessibility,
we're going to bring Kevin back,
and he's going to demonstrate a tool
that explores how some Cocoa apps are
exposed to the accessibility APIs.
Great, thanks Mike.
Let me turn speech recognition
off just so we can have some
more screen real estate here.
So what I'm going to do is start
up an application that we wrote
called UI Element Inspector.
Let me move it here and
make the font larger.
[Transcript missing]
Let's go through the things in here.
As you see right here,
it says "analog clock." That is
basically the type of object
that we're getting back for.
It's inside a window with the
name "window," and it's inside an
application named "clock control."
As Mike talked about the attributes,
it lists out all the attributes:
the role, role description,
some state information,
whether it's enabled, focused,
some references to its parent,
its window, its size, its position,
its value.
You can see here's the
string that's returned.
And then here is this extra attribute
that we used in the speech synthesis,
giving what we call an embedded command
string that produces that text-to-speech
that we heard when we moused over it.
And then if we scroll
down here a little bit,
we'll see the actions,
and it supports an increment
action and a decrement action.
So let's play with it just a little bit.
And send it an increment action.
As we do that through
the accessibility API,
you'll see the increments,
and we can change and send it an action,
or a decrement action.
And then we can also change attributes.
So the ones with a W say
that we can write to them.
So we can do something like this.
We can set one to be true.
As we click set value,
it will miniaturize the window
and set it back to zero.
And it will bring it back.
So anyway, that's a quick demo of that.
Our speech session is tomorrow
afternoon in the same room.
So if you'd like to attend that,
we'd love to have you there.
So thanks a lot.
[Transcript missing]
There's a method called
"accessibilityIsIgnored" in the protocol,
and if you return "yes" from that,
then that means you're
supposed to be ignored.
So when the button returns its parent,
if the parent's ignored,
it should return its parent, and so on.
Similarly,
when you ask the window for its children,
if the content view is ignored,
we then go to the
content view's children.
To keep you from having to
write this code to walk these
hierarchies up and down,
we have a few convenience routines.
If you're returning
your parent attribute,
you can use the accessibility
unignored ancestor routine,
and there's another routine if
you're returning your children,
and there's a couple other related
routines for similar needs.
Another thing that the
Accessibility APIs allow
is to determine what user interface
element is under the mouse,
and we saw Kevin making
extensive use of that.
And there's also a similar
facility for finding out what user
interface element has the focus.
So how is this going to be accomplished?
You can imagine, in a Cocoa app,
the first thing we would do is find
out what window the mouse is in,
and then we could use View's hit test
method to find out which view was hit.
But that's about all Cocoa could do.
And similarly,
if we want to find the focus,
we can find out what the key window is,
and then we can discover
the first responder.
But that's about all
that we can do for you.
If you happen to have substructure,
like a matrix has cells within it,
and you want to make it appear that
one of the cells has the focus,
that's really up to the matrix to do it.
If we were trying to accessorize the
analog clock a little differently,
if we wanted the hands to
show up and be hit testable,
we would have to do that work.
So basically, if you have substructure
that you want to expose,
these methods that I'm going
to show you here are what
you're going to need to use.
So there's one for hit testing
and one for focus testing.
And when these methods are called,
it means it's already been determined
that you have the keyboard focus or
that the mouse is within your bounds.
And that's your chance to decide if some
subpart of you has it and return that,
or failing that,
you can just return yourself.
The last part of the accessibility
APIs has to do with notifications.
So assistive apps want to find out about
changes in their target application.
They want to find out
when the application gets
activated or deactivated.
And then there's window events,
if a window is miniaturized
or deminiaturized,
if the focus changes,
or when UI elements get destroyed.
So there's a whole
variety of notifications,
and most of them are
handled by Cocoa for you.
If you need to post a notification,
the most likely one that you
would need to do is value change.
So the clock would be a prime example.
When we change its value,
we'd want to post a value
change notification.
And the call you make is an
S-accessibility post notification.
That's fairly straightforward.
So there's one special attribute
I haven't talked about that much,
and that's the role attribute.
This attribute identifies
what kind of user interface
element you're dealing with.
For instance,
there's like a role for buttons,
check boxes have a role,
menus have a role.
A role should indicate that anything
of that role should have the same
set of actions and attributes,
and assistive apps are going to
generally rely on that information.
So you should avoid inventing new roles.
Assistive apps won't be
prepared to deal with it.
Now, one pitfall you want to avoid
is the temptation to invent
a rule just to provide some
instance-specific information.
For instance, you've got a print button
in your application,
and you might ask yourself, "Well,
how is this assistive app going to
know that this is a print button?"
The answer is it's not going to know.
The assistive app is only designed to
help the user use your application.
It's going to know
there's a button there,
it's going to know
there's a press action,
and it can tell the user that
the title of the button is print.
And that's where it stops.
If the user can understand
that and if they want to print,
they can tell the assistive app,
"Go ahead and perform the button action."
So in summary,
using Cocoa is going to give you a
leg up on making your app accessible.
So I would say most Cocoa apps
already work to a large
extent with accessibility.
Your custom UI elements,
as long as you remain in the same
spirit of what you're inheriting from,
they're probably going to work too.
But if you create
something totally novel,
like a clock widget,
then you need to read up on
the accessibility protocol
and implement a few methods.